#P
PREFACE;

This is a little book on the history of computers intended
for those who enjoy the "quick and dirty" approach to
knowledge.


#P
UNIT I:  THE HISTORY OF COMPUTERS;

The history of the computer can be traced back to the
abacus; used by the ancient Romans, Greeks, and Chinese.
Even today, some folks do computing on the abacus.

#P
BLAISE PASCAL AND THE PASCALINE;

The first mechanical adding machine was developed by Blaise
Pascal;, a French mathematician, in 1642.  While still a
teenager, Pascal developed the machine which could add and
subtract.  Even today, many microprocessors can really only
add and subtract.  They handle division and multiplication
by performing high speed addition and subtraction.

Pascal's father was a tax collector.  As a child Blaise
watched his father labor over columns of figures.  From that
experience He developed his mechanical calculating machine
which was called the Pascaline;.  It was a device with gears
(numbered 0 through 9) and levers.  The Pascaline never
really caught on.  Clerks, who might have benefited from its
use, feared they might lose their jobs if the new device
became widely accepted.  A favorite quote from Pascal is
"the last thing one knows in constructing a work is what to
put first."

#P
THE BARON AND HIS MACHINE;

Baron Gottfried Wilhelm von Leibnitz; a German philosopher,
mathematician, and inventor; developed a machine in the late
1600s which could handle addition, subtraction,
multiplication and division.  These latter two functions
used repeated addition and subtraction just like today's
microprocessors.  The machine was first demonstrated in 1694
and moved the world closer to an age of mechanical
computing.

#P
THE WEAVER IN COMPUTER HISTORY;

The next evolutionary step toward modern computing took
place in the 1800s.  Joseph Marie Jacquard;, a weaver,
developed a unique system for storing information on cards.
Holes in cards determined the thread colors to be used by
the loom in weaving a pattern.  In essence, the information
was stored (or coded) on cards similar to the key punch
cards used in a later age of computing.  By stringing a
group of cards together, Jacquard Jacquard:programmed
weaving;established a "program" which resulted in material
of a certain pattern.

#P
THE FATHER OF COMPUTERS;

In 1832, Charles Babbage; designed the Babbage:Difference
Machine;.  It was an attempt at developing a machine which
could handle problems and then generate a printed response.
Babbage, an English mathematician;,  is considered the
Babbage:father of modern computing;.

The genesis for the Difference Machine; was a study he
conducted of mathematical tables used by clerks in making
calculations.  He discovered that the tables included many
copying errors from the print shop.  Babbage sought to
develop a machine which would calculate and then print the
results.

In 1832, the British government funded the building of the
Difference Machine. While Babbage was able to build a
prototype, he failed to build a larger unit because the
technology required did not yet exist.

#P
Later Babbage conceived of an Babbage:Analytical Machine;,
which like the Difference Machine, would have been a
combination of gears and levers, yet run by steam power.
The machine would have been similar to the modern computer
in several ways.  It would

 1.  be general purpose in nature;
 2.  run by instructions on punched cards;
 3.  have internal memory for instructions;
 4.  automatically print results.

Babbage died before completing the model for the Analytical
Machine.  He had many good ideas, unfortunately many never
became reality.  It was a classic case of a man with great
ideas; that did not work, because he was 150 years ahead of
his time.  The ideas he developed became the basis for the
successes of later inventors who had access to technology
only dreamed of by Babbage.

#P
Unfortunately, in his later years, Babbage was largely
unappreciated.  In a passage from the Babbage:LIFE OF A
PHILOSOPHER; he wrote, "I have sacrificed time, health, and
fortune, in the desire to complete these Calculating
Engines.  I have also declined several offers of great
personal advantage to myself.  But, notwithstanding the
sacrifice of these advantages...I have received neither an
acknowledgement of my labors, nor even the offer of those
honors or rewards which are allowed to fall within the reach
of men who devote themselves to purely scientific
investigations....  I think the application of machinery in
aid of the most complicated and abstruse calculations can no
longer be deemed unworthy of the attention of the country.
In fact, there is no reason why mental as well as bodily
labor should not be economized by the aid of machinery."

#P
THE FIRST LADY OF COMPUTING;

Much of the information known about Babbage comes from the
writings of Ada Augusta, Ada Augusta:countess of Lovelace;.
She first met Babbage when still a child.  Ada was one of a
group to whom Babbage showed his Difference Machine.
According to Babbage, she was the only one in the group who
"understood its workings and saw the great beauty of its
invention."

Ada is considered the "First Lady" of computing.  Her notes
are the best indication of what the Analytical Engine was to
be.  Further, she was the Ada Augusta:first programmer; and
the first to speculate on whether machines might someday
"think".

#P
HOLLERITH AND THE TEDIOUS CENSUS;

Herman Hollerith;, the founder of a company which later
became IBM;, tackled the task of mechanizing the tabulation
of the 1890 census.  The 1880 census had taken 7 years to
tabulate.  The government was afraid that with the influx of
immigrants and natural population increases, that the 1890
census; would still not be tabulated (under the old method)
before the 1900 census came around.   The government
commissioned Hollerith, an American, to develop a mechanical
method of performing massive tabulations.  He built a
machine powered by electricity which used punched cards.

Between 1880 and 1890 the U.S. population had increased from
50 to 63 million.  With Hollerith's machine the tabulation
of the 1890 census only took 2.5 years compared to 7 years
for the 1880 census (under the old manual method).  As an
interesting historical note, genealogists can tell you that
an unfortunate 1921 fire in the U.S. Commerce Department
resulted in the almost total lost of the 1890 census.  Only
scattered fragments of the censure remain and they fit
easily on three rolls of 35mm microfilm.

In 1896 Hollerith went on to found the Tabulating Machine
Company.  It developed punched card machines for the
government and business.  By 1911 the company merged with
several other companies to become the Computer-Tabulating-
Recording Company with Hollerith listed as Chief Engineer.
In 1924 CTRC changed its name to International Business
Machines (IBM) Corporation.  By 1930 IBM; held 80% of the
market share in the manufacture of punched card equipment.
Even though these machines were used for computing, they
were only Computers:electromechanical devices;, not
electronic computers.

#P
THE MARRIAGE OF IBM, HARVARD, AND THE NAVY;

Harvard University continued in Hollerith's path by building
an early computer called MARK I in 1944.  Under the guidance
of Howard Aiken:Howard;, a naval lieutenant assigned to
Harvard, the work was begun to develop an electromechanical
punched card machine for use in handling scientific
calculations.  IBM provided a $500,000 grant, Harvard
provided the research space, and the Navy provided Aiken.
Their goal was a general purpose computer which could assist
with aircraft design, procurement, and weapons development.
The work began in 1939 and culminated in 1944 with the
Automatic Controlled Sequence Calculator called MARK I;.  It
really was a gigantic electrical adding machine with 1
million parts, 3 million connections, and 500 miles of wire
housed in an area 55 foot long and 8 foot tall.  This little
baby weighed 5 tons.

MARK I could complete multiplication functions in 6 seconds
and division in 12 seconds.  That may seem slow by today's
standards, but the speed was slowed by the massive distances
involved, remember the 500 miles of wire.  MARK I was the
first official Computers:electromechanical devices;computer.
#P
THE LOW BUDGET APPROACH IN IOWA;

About the same time John Atanasoff and Clifford Berry were
building a machine at Iowa State University.  Its purpose
was to help graduate students with the tedium of solving
linear equations.  Begun in 1939 on a $650 grant from ISU,
the Atanasoff-Berry Computer (ABC) included 300 vacuum
tubes, could solve 29 simultaneous equations with 29
variables.  Unlike the MARK I, the ABC was a
Computers:special purpose; computer rather than a general
purpose one.

#P
UNIT II:  GENERATIONS OF A COMPUTER'S LIFE;

What is now considered the "Computers:first generation;" of
computers was born with the appearance of the Electronic
Numerical Integrator And Calculator (ENIAC) in 1946.  It was
much faster than MARK I and used 18,000 vacuum tubes.  ENIAC
is considered the first large scale general purpose
computer. It heralded in the age of electronic digital
computers.

#P
AIMING AT ENIAC;

ENIAC; was birthed by J. Presper Eckert, an electrical
engineer, and John Mauchly, a physicist.  They submitted a
proposal to the Army to do calculations in seconds.  The
anticipated end result was to assist in war time firing and
ballistics.  Aiming exercises were mechanical and less than
accurate or efficient.  The Army was looking for a
computerized approach to the manual process of setting
ranges, taking aim and firing on enemy positions and
carriers.

The finished product could perform 300 days of calculations
in one day.  ENIAC was 100 feet long, 10 feet tall and 3
feet deep.  It consumed 140 kilowatts of electricity when in
operation.  Unfortunately, switches had to be thrown for
each new calculation.  A single calculation could take hours
to setup.  ENIAC has long since been retired to the
Smithsonian Institute.

#P
THOSE COOL TRANSISTORS;

Remember those 18,000 vacuum tubes which kept ENIAC humming?
They were replaced in the "Computers:second generation;" of
computers by smaller, cooler running, more reliable
transistors (which also heralded the introduction of the
transistor radio).  The second generation of computers were
produced between 1959 and 1964.

#P
THE THIRD GENERATION; ON A BOARD;

"Computers:Third generation;" computers (1965-1970) began to
use integrated circuits where the electronic circuitry
contained in earlier transistor and vacuum tube technology
was placed on a piece of material (board) without wires.

#P
CHIPS ON SAND;

"Computers:Fourth generation;" computers took the integrated
circuit concept to the extreme by reducing the circuitry in
size, placing it on a tiny silicon chip and thus introducing
the microchip.  This became the age of miniaturization and
began around 1971.  Each of those tiny silicon chips
developed the capacity to store tens of thousands of
circuits.  This etched circuitry became prevalent in
watches, toys, automobiles, microwaves and appliances.

#P
THE THINKING MACHINE;

"Computers:Fifth generation;" computers have only partially
arrived.  They incorporate artificial intelligence into
computing.

One of the first efforts at the development of artificial
intelligence software was an interactive program called
Eliza;.  Eliza played the role of psychologist.  When you
entered a comment she responded with a nebulous, yet
concerned question picking up on key words in your
statement.   After a few sessions with Eliza, your mental
health remained unimproved.  However,  your mental state was
boredom; with Eliza.

More recent advances have computers evaluating items (using
visual sensors) and computers designing other more efficient
computers.  The sky is the limit as this technology
advances.
